# Control Flow (for) {#control-flow}

## The `for` loop

The `for..in` statement is another looping statement which *iterates* over a sequence of objects i.e. go through each item in a sequence (like a list or a string).

Example:

``` python
for i in range(1, 5):
    print(i)
else:
    print('The for loop is over')
```

Output:

```{=html}
<pre><code>
1
2
3
4
The for loop is over
</code></pre>
```

**How It Works**

In this program, we are printing a *sequence* of numbers. We generate this sequence of numbers using the built-in `range` function.

What we do here is supply it two numbers and `range` returns a sequence of numbers starting from the first number and up to the second number. For example, `range(1,5)` gives the sequence `[1, 2, 3, 4]`. By default, `range` takes a step count of 1. If we supply a third number to `range`, then that becomes the step count. For example, `range(1,5,2)` gives `[1,3]`. Remember that the range extends *up to* the second number i.e. it does *not* include the second number.

Note that `range()` generates only one number at a time, if you want the full list of numbers, call `list()` on the `range()`, for example, `list(range(5))` will result in `[0, 1, 2, 3, 4]`. Lists are explained in the [data structures chapter](./data_structures.md#data-structures).

The `for` loop then iterates over this range - `for i in range(1,5)` is equivalent to `for i in [1, 2, 3, 4]` which is like assigning each number (or object) in the sequence to i, one at a time, and then executing the block of statements for each value of `i`. In this case, we just print the value in the block of statements.

Remember that the `else` part is optional. When included, it is always executed once after the `for` loop is over unless a [break](#break-statement) statement is encountered.

Remember that the `for..in` loop works for any sequence. Here, we have a list of numbers generated by the built-in `range` function, but in general we can use any kind of sequence of any kind of objects! We will explore this idea in detail in later chapters.

> **Note for C/C++/Java/C# Programmers**
>
> The Python `for` loop is radically different from the C/C++ `for` loop. C# programmers will note that the `for` loop in Python is similar to the `foreach` loop in C#. Java programmers will note that the same is similar to `for (int i : IntArray)` in Java 1.5.
>
> In C/C++, if you want to write `for (int i = 0; i < 5; i++)`, then in Python you write just `for i in range(0,5)`. As you can see, the `for` loop is simpler, more expressive and less error prone in Python.


## Summary

We have seen how to use the three control flow statements - `if`, `while` and `for`  statements. These are some of the most commonly used parts of Python and hence, becoming comfortable with them is essential.

